PDF: Typst chapter (#21)
mine-cetinkaya-rundel/quarto-tdg: typst.qmd

# PDF {#sec-typst}

## Overview

In this chapter, you'll learn how to create PDF documents with Quarto.

> PDF is the right target when you plan to print, need a single self-contained file to share, or care about precise layout of content on "pages". 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PDF is the right target when you plan to print, need a single self-contained file to share, or care about the precise layout of content on "pages". 
```

> We'll focus exclusively on creating PDFs via Typst, i.e. `format: typst`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll focus exclusively on creating PDFs via Typst, i.e., `format: typst`.
```

Typst is a modern typesetting system that comes bundled with Quarto.
There are alternatives in Quarto,
most notably, `format: pdf` which creates a PDF via LaTeX. 

> We think for new authors, its both easier to get started, and easier to advance with Typst:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We think for new authors, it's both easier to get started and easier to advance with Typst:
```

* Typst comes bundled with Quarto, so getting to your first PDF document requires nothing more than adding `format: typst`.

* Typst compiles very quickly, reducing the time it takes to preview your changes.

> * Typst's scripting language is similar to other languages you may already know (like R and Python) which makes it easier to understand existing templates, and customize your documents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Typst's scripting language is similar to other languages you may already know (like R and Python), which makes it easier to understand existing templates and customize your documents.
```

There are situations where LaTeX may be a better fit:

* You need to work with existing LaTeX templates, like a journal article template.

* You already rely on LaTeX packages for advanced typesetting of math or equations.

If you are in these situations, you may find the [PDF Basics guide](https://quarto.org/docs/output-formats/pdf-basics.htmlv) in the Quarto documentation a better place to start. 

Readers who use screen readers and other assistive technologies generally have a smoother experience with HTML (@sec-html) than with PDF. 
If that describes part of your audience — or if accessibility is a primary concern — HTML is often the better target. 
Accessible PDFs are possible (we'll cover that in @sec-pdf-accessibility), but the tooling ecosystem is younger.

In the next section, you'll create your first PDF document with `format: typst`.
Then, you'll cover the types of content you'll most likely need in your first few documents: navigation, citations, math, code blocks, and computational outputs.

> In @sec-pdf-accessibility you'll learn the keys to creating accessible PDFs, and in @sec-customizing-appearance how to customize the page layout, fonts, and colors of your document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In @sec-pdf-accessibility, you'll learn the keys to creating accessible PDFs, and in @sec-customizing-appearance, how to customize the page layout, fonts, and colors of your document.
```

Finally, you'll learn where to head next if you need to go beyond Quarto's default Typst options.

## Your first PDF document

Creating a PDF is as simple as adding `format: typst` to your document header:

```{.markdown}
---
format: typst
---
```

> Here's a short, but complete example, with some common content types — headings, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's a short but complete example, with some common content types — headings, 
```

a table, and cross-references:

````{.markdown filename="train-punctuality.qmd" .code-overflow-wrap}
{{< include _examples/typst/first-document/train-punctuality.qmd >}}
````

> To create the PDF, render, either by Previewing in your IDE, or in the terminal:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create the PDF, render, either by Previewing in your IDE or in the terminal:
```

```{.bash filename="Terminal"}
quarto render train-punctuality.qmd
```

Behind the scenes, Quarto converts your markdown source into Typst's own markup language (`.typ`), then uses the bundled Typst to compile the `.typ` to PDF.
The result is `train-punctuality.pdf`, the rendered PDF, shown in @fig-typst-train-punctuality. 

![The rendered output of `train-punctuality.qmd`](images/typst-first-document-train-punctuality.png){#fig-typst-train-punctuality .border fig-alt="A rendered PDF showing a Route Punctuality Report with a table of on-time rates by route and a recommendations section."}

You can see the headings, table and cross-references all "just work".
In the following sections, we'll cover other common content types you commonly need in your first few documents. 
You can also check out @sec-authoring for a more comprehensive set of features available across formats, including `format: typst`.

::: {.callout-note}

## PDFs are static documents

You can try swapping to `format: typst` in any existing Quarto document.

> Most markdown features will carry over, but beware of features that introduce interactivity, like code folding, or hover effects, these won't be supported in PDF because PDF is a static format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most markdown features will carry over, but beware of features that introduce interactivity, like code folding or hover effects; these won't be supported in PDF because PDF is a static format.
```

:::

## Navigation

PDF documents support links, allowing your readers to quickly navigate your document.

> To make navigation easier for readers, you can add a table of contents (`toc`), and section numbers (`number-sections`) in your document header:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make navigation easier for readers, you can add a table of contents (`toc`) and section numbers (`number-sections`) in your document header:
```

## Links

You can also use markdown link syntax to add links directly to other sections in your document, or to external resources:

```{.markdown filename="train-punctuality.qmd" .code-overflow-wrap}
{{< include _examples/typst/links/_recommendations.qmd >}}
```

Both render as plain text in the default template — they're clickable in a PDF viewer, but visually indistinguishable from the surrounding prose.
You'll learn how to style them in @sec-typst-fonts-colors.

## Citations

Citations require a bibliography file holding reference metadata. 
A common format for this is BibTeX (`.bib`):

```{.bibtex filename="references.bib"}
{{< include _examples/typst/citations/references.bib >}}
```

To cite an item in the bibliography, specify the bibliography file in `bibliography` and use the `@` syntax in your text:

````{.markdown filename="train-punctuality.qmd" .code-overflow-wrap}
{{< include _examples/typst/citations/train-punctuality.qmd >}}
````

![Default citation style](images/typst-citations-train-punctuality.png){#fig-typst-citations .border fig-alt="A short PDF document showing a numbered in-text citation and a bibliography entry."}

> Citations in `format: typst` use Typst's native processing, and consequently, a different default citation style to other Quarto formats.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Citations in `format: typst` use Typst's native processing and, consequently, a different default citation style from other Quarto formats.
```

````{.yaml filename="train-punctuality.qmd"}
---
format: typst
bibliography: references.bib
csl: chicago-author-date
---
````

![Chicago author-date citation style, the default for HTML formats](images/typst-citations-chicago-train-punctuality.png){#fig-typst-citations-chicago .border fig-alt="A short PDF document showing a Chicago author-date in-text citation and a bibliography entry."}

You can read more about citations in @sec-citations, including about various `@` syntax variations.

## Mathematical equations

When you author to Typst from Quarto, use TeX math syntax to write your equations.
Use single dollar signs (`$...$`) for inline math, and double dollar signs (`$$...$$`) for display equations:

````{.markdown filename="equations.qmd" .code-overflow-wrap}
{{< include _examples/typst/math/equations.qmd >}}
````

![Inline and display math rendered in Typst](images/typst-math-equations.png){#fig-typst-math-equations .border fig-alt="A PDF showing an inline mean symbol in a sentence and a numbered display equation for the sample mean."}

::: {.callout-note}
## Typst has its own math syntax

> Typst's has it's own (non-TeX) math notation, but you won't need to learn it, because Quarto converts TeX math to Typst math for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Typst has its own (non-TeX) math notation, but you won't need to learn it, because Quarto converts TeX math to Typst math for you.
```

This keeps math portable — the same TeX syntax renders across HTML, Typst and other formats without edits.
:::

You can read more about writing equations, including cross-referencing, in @sec-equations.

### Alt text {#sec-typst-math-alt}

> Alt text makes an equation accessible to screen readers, and is required to meet the PDF/UA-1 standard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alt text makes an equation accessible to screen readers and is required to meet the PDF/UA-1 standard.
```

Reviewer: Might be good to say what this standard is or at least link to it?

You can add alternative text to cross-referenced display equations with an `alt=` attribute:

````{.markdown filename="equations.qmd" .code-overflow-wrap}
{{< include _examples/typst/math/equations-alt.qmd >}}
````

![Display equation with alt text](images/typst-math-equations-alt.png){#fig-typst-math-equations-alt .border fig-alt="A PDF showing a numbered display equation for the sample mean."}

::: {.callout-caution}

## No alt text for inline math

There is currently no way to add alt text to inline math in `format: typst`.

:::

### Theorems

> When you use one Quarto's theorem environments you'll get special styling in Typst.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you use one of Quarto's theorem environments, you'll get special styling in Typst.
```

````

The default theorem appearance is `simple`: a bold title followed by italic body text.
Switch to a different flavor with `theorem-appearance`:

```{.yaml filename="_quarto-fancy.yml"}
format:
  typst:
    theorem-appearance: fancy
```

The available options are `simple`, `fancy`, `clouds`, and `rainbow`:

::: {#fig-typst-math-theorem}
::: {layout-ncol=2}
![`simple`](images/typst-math-theorem.png){#fig-typst-math-theorem-simple .border fig-alt="A theorem in simple LaTeX style with bold title and italic body text."}

![`fancy`](images/typst-math-theorem-fancy.png){#fig-typst-math-theorem-fancy .border fig-alt="A theorem in a rounded box with an orange header."}

![`clouds`](images/typst-math-theorem-clouds.png){#fig-typst-math-theorem-clouds .border fig-alt="A theorem with a soft pink background and rounded corners."}

![`rainbow`](images/typst-math-theorem-rainbow.png){#fig-typst-math-theorem-rainbow .border fig-alt="A theorem with a red left border and red title."}
:::

Available values for `theorem-appearance` to style theorems.
:::

`theorem-appearance` applies to every type of theorem-like element Quarto recognizes, not just `thm-`.

> When you use `fancy`, `clouds` or `rainbow`, different types get different accent colors so you can tell a definition from a theorem at a glance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you use `fancy`, `clouds`, or `rainbow`, different types get different accent colors so you can tell a definition from a theorem at a glance.
```

You can find all the available types in @sec-theorems-proofs.

## Code blocks

> When you include a code block it will get automatic syntax highlighting based

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you include a code block, it will get automatic syntax highlighting based
```

Computational code cells work in `format: typst` just as they do in other formats.
Outputs like figures, tables, and inline values are inserted into the PDF at the point of the cell.

For example, here's a cell that produces a figure:

::: {.panel-tabset}
## R

````{.markdown filename="report.qmd" .code-overflow-wrap}
```{{r}}
{{< include _examples/typst/computational-outputs/figure-cell.R >}}
```
````

## Python

````{.markdown filename="report.qmd" .code-overflow-wrap}
```{{python}}
{{< include _examples/typst/computational-outputs/figure-cell.py >}}
```
````
:::

The cell uses `echo: false`, so the code itself is hidden in the rendered output; the figure appears directly below the surrounding prose with a numbered caption, as shown in @fig-typst-computational-outputs-figures.

![Rendered output of the figure cell, with the figure inserted directly below the introductory sentence](images/typst-computational-outputs-figures.png){#fig-typst-computational-outputs-figures .border fig-alt="A page showing the sentence 'Figure 1 shows on-time rates across the network's routes' followed by a bar chart of on-time rate by route, captioned Figure 1: On-time rate by route."}

> While most computational outputs render as expected, there a few quirks to be aware of, which we'll cover the sections below: figure format, table formats and long tables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While most computational outputs render as expected, there are a few quirks to be aware of that we'll cover in the sections below: figure formats, table formats, and long tables.
```

### Figure format

Quarto defaults to SVG for computational figures in Typst.
SVG is a vector format, so it scales well and looks crisp at any size.
However, it can be slow to render when a figure contains many elements, like a busy scatterplot with thousands of points.
Set `fig-format` in the document header to switch default format, e.g. to `png` for raster output:

```{.yaml filename="report.qmd"}
---
format:
  typst:
    fig-format: png
---
```

### Table formats

> Any code that produces a markdown, HTML, or raw Typst table will render to a table in your PDF.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any code that produces a markdown, HTML, or raw Typst table will render as a table in your PDF.
```

Often it's not easy to tell which format you've ended up with. 
The easiest way to check is to add `keep-md` to your header:

````{.yaml filename="report.qmd"}
---
format:
  typst:
    keep-md: true
---
````

Then examine the table output in the resulting `.md` file, e.g. `report.typst.md`.

> For simple tables, code that outputs a markdown table (@sec-markdown-pipe-tables), will often be the best choice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For simple tables, code that outputs a markdown table (@sec-markdown-pipe-tables) will often be the best choice.
```

> Markdown tables are converted to native Typst tables by Quarto, and it will inherit your documents styling, like fonts and colors, so the table will blend with the rest of your document. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Markdown tables are converted to native Typst tables by Quarto and inherit your document's styling, such as fonts and colors, so the table blends with the rest of your document. 
```

> The advantage of HTML tables (@sec-html-tables), is that cell-level formatting, like coloring that depends on the data, will be preserved. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The advantage of HTML tables (@sec-html-tables) is that cell-level formatting, such as data-dependent coloring, will be preserved. 
```

> For example, these code blocks use the `gt` package in R and `great_tables` in Python to produce tables with colored cells:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the following code blocks use the `gt` package in R and `great_tables` in Python to produce tables with colored cells:
```

::: {.panel-tabset}
## R

````{.markdown filename="report.qmd" .code-overflow-wrap}
```{{r}}
{{< include _examples/typst/computational-outputs/tables.R >}}
```
````

## Python

````{.markdown filename="report.qmd" .code-overflow-wrap}
```{{python}}
{{< include _examples/typst/computational-outputs/tables.py >}}
```
````
:::

> When rendered to Typst the cell level coloring survives, as shown in @fig-typst-computational-outputs-tables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When rendered to Typst, the cell-level coloring survives, as shown in @fig-typst-computational-outputs-tables.
```

However, notice the font is now the `gt`/`great_tables` default san-serif font.

![A `gt` table rendered in Typst](images/typst-computational-outputs-tables.png){#fig-typst-computational-outputs-tables .border fig-alt="A table of on-time rates by route with four columns: Route, On time, Total, and On-time rate (%)."}

> Most packages that produce HTML tables will have a way to customize the styles in the tables they produce. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most packages that produce HTML tables offer a way to customize the styles of the tables they produce. 
```

You'll need to look into the package documentation to find out how.

> Packages that produce raw Typst tables, may get the best of both worlds, inheriting the document's fonts and styling, while allowing for cell-level formatting. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Packages that produce raw Typst tables may get the best of both worlds, inheriting the document's fonts and styling while allowing for cell-level formatting. 
```

However, there are currently very few packages that produce raw Typst tables.

### Long tables

When your code creates a very long table, you'll want it to break across pages, rather than being cut off at the bottom of the page.

> If you haven't set `label:` and `tbl-cap:`, i.e. it isn't cross-referenceable, the table will break across pages by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you haven't set `label:` and `tbl-cap:`, i.e., it isn't cross-referenceable, the table will break across pages by default.
```

> If you have set `label:` and `tbl-cap:`, the table won't be breakable by default, and will overflow the page instead of breaking across it, as shown in @fig-typst-computational-outputs-long-table-broken.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have set `label:` and `tbl-cap:`, the table won't be breakable by default and will overflow the page instead of breaking across it, as shown in @fig-typst-computational-outputs-long-table-broken.
```

![A long cross-referenceable table overflowing a single page](images/typst-computational-outputs-long-table-broken.png){#fig-typst-computational-outputs-long-table-broken .border width="40%" fig-alt="A long gt table whose last two rows are cut off at the bottom of the page."}

To let cross-referenceable tables break across pages, add a raw Typst block after your document header:

````{.markdown filename="report.qmd"}
---
title: "Route Punctuality Report"
---

```{{=typst}}
#show figure: set block(breakable: true)
```
````

> Now the long table flows cleanly across pages, with the table header repeated on each:

Reviewer: I'm glad we're addressing this, long tables are always a pain...

:::

The long table broken cleanly across two pages.
:::

You'll learn more about raw Typst blocks in the next section.

## Raw Typst blocks

If you explore the [Typst documentation](https://typst.app/docs/reference/), you'll find a rich syntax that can go beyond what Quarto markdown supports.
For anything that Quarto doesn't support you can use Typst syntax directly inside a raw block (@sec-raw-blocks).

The contents of a raw block pass through to Typst without being processed by Quarto, and are ignored in any other format.
For example, you can use a raw Typst block to add status badge that uses the [`rect`](https://typst.app/docs/reference/visualize/rect/), [`align`](https://typst.app/docs/reference/layout/align/), and [`text`](https://typst.app/docs/reference/text/text/) Typst functions:

````{.markdown .code-overflow-wrap filename="report.qmd"}
{{< include _examples/typst/raw-typst/shape.qmd >}}
````

![A blue status badge labelled "Normal" rendered below the prose](images/typst-raw-typst-shape.png){#fig-typst-raw-typst-shape .border fig-alt="A line reading Service status, followed by a rounded blue rectangle with the word Normal centered in white."}

> Another good use case for raw blocks is to customize appearance with set and show rules as you'll see in @sec-use-show-rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another good use case for raw blocks is to customize appearance with set and show rules, as you'll see in @sec-use-show-rules.
```

## Full-width or margin content {#sec-typst-full-width-margin}

> By default, your document content will sit in the body column of your PDF document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, your document content will appear in the body column of your PDF.
```

> Sometimes you may want to break out of that column, and use the full page width, or put content into the right margin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes you may want to break out of that column and use the full page width, or put content into the right margin.
```

- `.column-body-outset` — slightly wider than the body, extending into the margins
- `.column-page-inset` — almost the full page width
- `.column-page` — extends to the page margins

Each of the wider three has `-left` and `-right` variants for one-sided expansion.
@fig-typst-column-layout-extents shows the extent of each.

![Extent column classes on a single page](images/typst-column-layout-extents.png){#fig-typst-column-layout-extents .border fig-alt="A page laid out with one rectangle per column class, sized to its width: a small body rectangle at top, a margin rectangle in the right margin, three body-outset rectangles slightly wider than the body, three page-inset rectangles wider still, and three page rectangles extending to the page margins."}

For document-wide defaults, set `tbl-column` and `fig-column` in the document header:

```{.yaml filename="report.qmd"}
---
format: typst
fig-column: page
tbl-column: page
---
```

Both apply to every cross-referenceable table or figure in the document — markdown pipe tables, list tables, and computational outputs alike.
Tables and figures without an identifier are unaffected, as are non-cross-referenceable images and tables.

> When you place content outside the default body column, the layout mechanism of your document changes from a simple single body area, to a layout using the Typst [marginalia package](https://typst.app/universe/package/marginalia/) to manage the margin allocation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you place content outside the default body column, the layout mechanism of your document changes from a simple single body area to a layout using the Typst [marginalia package](https://typst.app/universe/package/marginalia/) to manage the margin allocation.
```

You'll learn more about managing this layout in @sec-margin-geometry.

## Making accessible PDFs {#sec-pdf-accessibility}

Accessibility is about increasing the reach of your documents. 
A PDF that's well-structured can be used by more people -- like readers who navigate with a screen reader, who zoom to 400%, who can't tell red from green, or who depend on assistive technology to work through a long document.

The Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) are the most widely accepted standard for what counts as "accessible".
When a regulation says your document must be accessible, it almost always points to these guidelines.

> However, since the WCAG was written for the web, and is deliberately technology-agnostic, it doesn't directly map to requirements for PDFs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, since the WCAG was written for the web and is deliberately technology-agnostic, it doesn't directly map to requirements for PDFs.
```

> For PDF documents, you'll more likely be working with a PDF standard. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For PDF documents, you'll be more likely to work with a PDF standard. 
```

PDF/UA-1 is one such standard, supported by Typst, that translates WCAG into testable rules for PDFs.
You can target this standard by setting `pdf-standard: ua-1` in your document header:

```{.yaml filename="report.qmd"}
---
title: "Route Punctuality Report"
author: "Dr. Sarah Okonkwo"
lang: en
format:
  typst:
    pdf-standard: ua-1
---
```

> When you do so, your document is marked as targeting this standard, and is checked twice during the rendering process:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you do so, your document is marked as targeting this standard and is checked twice during the rendering process:
```

[verapdf]: Validating train-punctuality.pdf against PDF/UA1...PASSED
```

For a document that fails validation, you'll see an error from the `[typst]` compile step along with an error from Typst that describes the failure:

```{.default filename="Terminal"}
[typst]: Compiling train-punctuality-not.typ to train-punctuality-not.pdf...error: PDF/UA-1 error: missing alt text

...

ERROR: Typst compilation failed
```

Because the Typst compilation fails, you won't get the `.pdf` output. 

### What does it mean to pass PDF/UA-1 validation?

Passing PDF/UA-1 validation is a useful first step to ensuring an accessible document, but it doesn't mean your document is accessible.
There are two big caveats to be aware of:

#### Passing PDF/UA-1 validation does not mean your document meets PDF/UA-1 {.unnumbered}

There are rules in PDF/UA-1 that cannot be checked automatically.
For example, consider the rule:

> PDF/UA-1: 7.1-8: `dc:title` clearly identifies the document. 

The `dc:title` element is set by `title` in your document header. 
Validation can check `dc:title` is set, but it can't check it "clearly identifies the document".

> As the human, meeting rules that require human judgement is your responsibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a human, meeting rules that require human judgment is your responsibility.
```

#### Meeting PDF/UA-1 does not mean your document meets WCAG {.unnumbered}

The rules in PDF/UA-1 cover structural requirements that are necessary for accessibility, but they don't cover all the content-level requirements in WCAG. 
For example, consider the rule:

> WCAG 2.1: 1.4.3 Contrast (Minimum): The visual presentation of text and images of text has a contrast ratio of at least 4.5:1, except for the following: ...

> This rule has no PDF/UA-1 equivalent, so you can fully meet all machine and human checkable PDF/UA-1 requirements without meeting WCAG.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This rule has no PDF/UA-1 equivalent, so you can fully meet all machine- and human-checkable PDF/UA-1 requirements without meeting WCAG.
```

Some tools can check additional WCAG rules but these are beyond the automated checks you'll get from Quarto.

### Accessibility best practices

The following best practices will help you meet most PDF/UA-1 and WCAG AA requirements.

#### Use semantic structure

> Your resulting PDF needs to tag content based on what it is, not how it looks: a section heading needs to be tagged as a heading not just be big and bold.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your resulting PDF needs to tag content based on what it is, not how it looks: a section heading needs to be tagged as a heading, not just be big and bold.
```

> Quarto's markdown encourages this naturally — when you write `## Recommendations`, Quarto knows this is a second-level heading, and it gets tagged as such in the PDF.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Quarto's markdown encourages this naturally — when you write `## Recommendations`, Quarto knows it is a second-level heading and tags it as such in the PDF.
```

> Be careful not to skip heading levels, e.g. jumping from `##` to `####` without an intervening `###`. Skipping levels can make navigation difficult for screen readers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Be careful not to skip heading levels, e.g., jumping from `##` to `####` without an intervening `###`. Skipping levels can make navigation difficult for screen readers.
```

#### Communicate a logical reading order

Quarto encourages this naturally too: the implied reading order is the same as the top-to-bottom order of elements in your `.qmd`.
For example, a figure is "read" based on its location in your `.qmd`, not where it ends up in the `.pdf`. As long as you write your `.qmd` to read from top-to-bottom, you'll meet this requirement.

#### Set required metadata

PDF/UA-1 validation will flag missing required metadata.
For example, you must set `title` in your document header to pass validation.

> Some metadata is filled with default values so you'll pass validation without setting them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some metadata is filled with default values, so you'll pass validation without setting them.
```

If your document is written in a language other than English, set `lang` appropriately. 

#### Provide alternative text for all images and equations

Validation will flag missing alt text — but you still need to write meaningful descriptions yourself.
Every image and every equation must have alt text.
For images, add alt text with the `fig-alt` attribute or code cell option (see @sec-markdown-figures).
For display equations, add alt text with the `alt` attribute in the equation's attribute block (see @sec-typst-math-alt).
There is currently no way to add alt text to inline math in `format: typst`, so avoid inline math, or use raw Typst for inline math, if you need to meet PDF/UA-1.

#### Use informative titles, headings, and alternative text

No automated check can tell whether a field's content is meaningful — only that the field is set.
"My document", "Section 4", or "chart" pass every automated check and leave your reader with nothing to navigate by.
It's your responsibility to ensure these accurately describe their content.

#### Use color choices that are readable

No automated check covers color or contrast — these are your responsibility.

> Foreground and background must have sufficient contrast, both in textual elements (body text, headings, code blocks, syntax highlighting) and in any parts of a figure important for understanding it (points, bars, lines, key icons etc.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Foreground and background must have sufficient contrast, both in textual elements (body text, headings, code blocks, syntax highlighting) and in any parts of a figure important for understanding it (points, bars, lines, key icons, etc.).
```

Meaning shouldn't depend on color alone — supplement with labels, patterns, or shape.
    

## Customizing appearance {#sec-customizing-appearance}

While the default appearance of `format: typst` is great for many "working" documents, you'll likely need to customize the appearance for published documents.

In this section, you'll learn how to customize the page layout (@sec-typst-page-layout) with document options, and fonts and colors with brand.yml (@sec-typst-fonts-colors).

> If none of the techniques in this section reach your needs, you'll might need the techniques in @sec-advanced-customization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If none of the techniques in this section meet your needs, you might need the techniques in @sec-advanced-customization.
```

As soon as you have a few colors, set a color `palette` to name them.
This makes it easier to reuse each color in multiple places:

```{.yaml filename="_brand.yml"}
{{< include _examples/typst/fonts-colors/_brand-palette.yml >}}
```

If you alter `background` and your document includes code blocks, you'll generally also want to set the code-block background with `typography.monospace-block.background-color`.
Pair it with a `syntax-highlighting` theme whose token colors contrast against the background you picked — for example, `a11y-dark` for a dark background:

```{.yaml filename="_brand.yml"}
{{< include _examples/typst/fonts-colors/_brand-code.yml >}}
```

```{.yaml filename="report.qmd"}
---
format:
  typst:
    syntax-highlighting: a11y-dark
---
```

![A dark code block with `a11y-dark` syntax highlighting](images/typst-fonts-colors-brand-code.png){#fig-typst-brand-code .border fig-alt="The cream document with the code block now on a dark charcoal background with a11y-dark syntax highlighting."}

::: {.callout-warning}
## Coordinate code backgrounds with syntax highlighting

Each theme you can pick from  `syntax-highlighting`  is tuned for either a light or dark background. 

> To maintain sufficient contrast between your code and it's background, make sure you pick a dark-tuned syntax highlighting theme when you use a dark code background.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To maintain sufficient contrast between your code and its background, make sure you pick a dark-tuned syntax highlighting theme when using a dark code background.
```

Reviewer: Is "tuned" the right term here? I've not used it before so I wasn't sure.

> Also be aware, some syntax highlighting themes explicitly set a background color (e.g. `github`) and you can not alter it via brand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also be aware that some syntax highlighting themes explicitly set a background color (e.g., `github`), and you cannot alter it via brand.
```

For example, you could use a different font for `base`, `headings` and `monospace`:

```{.yaml filename="_brand.yml"}
{{< include _examples/typst/fonts-colors/_brand-fonts.yml >}}
```

![EB Garamond, Barlow, and JetBrains Mono applied to body text, headings, and code](images/typst-fonts-colors-brand-fonts.png){#fig-typst-brand-fonts .border fig-alt="A white document with body text in EB Garamond, headings in the Barlow sans-serif, and code in JetBrains Mono showing a left-arrow ligature."}

The `monospace` option covers both inline and block code.
To target them separately, use `monospace-inline` and `monospace-block`.

We've illustrated `color` and `typography` independently, but you can set both in one `_brand.yml` to style colors and fonts together, as in @fig-typst-brand-all.

![The color and font settings combined in a single `_brand.yml`](images/typst-fonts-colors-brand-all.png){#fig-typst-brand-all .border fig-alt="The document with a cream background, teal headings, a navy underlined link, and a dark code block, now also rendered in EB Garamond, Barlow, and JetBrains Mono."}

## Advanced customization {#sec-advanced-customization}

> Most of the time the strategies in @sec-customizing-appearance will be enough to get a document that meets your needs, but there are limitations to those strategies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the time, the strategies in @sec-customizing-appearance will be enough to produce a document that meets your needs, but they have limitations.
```

#### Set rules

Every element you see in your PDF is the result of calling a Typst function.
Set rules are a way to change the default arguments for these functions.
For example, the [`page()` function](https://typst.app/docs/reference/layout/page/) is called to layout content on pages. 
It takes arguments for things like paper size, margin, numbering, header and footer.
If you wanted a header on your pages, you could use a set rule on `page` to set the `header` argument to your document title:

````{.markdown filename="report.qmd"}
{{< include _examples/typst/raw-typst/_page-header.qmd >}}
````

![A running header at the top of the page](images/typst-raw-typst-page-header.png){#fig-typst-raw-typst-page-header .border fig-alt="A PDF page with a Route Punctuality Report header at top, followed by Summary, Observations, and Recommendations sections."}

::: {.callout-note}
## `#set page()` starts a new page

> Typst treats `#set page()` as a page break — the current page finishes, and the new settings take effect on the page that follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Typst treats `#set page()` as a page break — the current page ends, and the new settings take effect on the following page.
```

You could double the line spacing from the default of `0.65em` with a set rule on `par()`:

````{.markdown filename="report.qmd"}
{{< include _examples/typst/raw-typst/_par-leading.qmd >}}
````

![Paragraphs with wider line spacing](images/typst-raw-typst-par-leading.png){#fig-typst-raw-typst-par-leading .border fig-alt="Summary, Observations, and Recommendations sections, each paragraph with extra vertical space between its lines."}

At the finest level, any text, regardless of where it appears, flows through the [`text()` function](https://typst.app/docs/reference/text/text/). 
The `text()` function has arguments controlling the appearance of text like color (`stroke` and `fill`), font properties (`font`, `weight`, `style`, `size` and `stretch`) and many more.

#### Show rules

Show rules allow you to set the defaults for a function within the scope of another.
For example, the headings in your document are created with the [`heading()` function](https://typst.app/docs/reference/model/heading/).
The `heading()` function takes arguments for things like the level of the heading, how it should be numbered etc, but not how it appears.

> To control the appearance of a heading you use set rules for the appropriate elements inside a show rule on `heading()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To control the appearance of a heading, you use set rules for the appropriate elements inside a show rule on `heading()`.
```

You can narrow the target of a show rule by appending `.where()` with a condition for the element. 
For example, `heading()` has a `level` argument. 
You could style level-2 headings to be italic with:

````{.markdown filename="report.qmd"}
{{< include _examples/typst/raw-typst/_heading-level.qmd >}}
````

![A level-2 Observations heading in italic, between upright level-1 headings](images/typst-raw-typst-heading-level.png){#fig-typst-raw-typst-heading-level .border fig-alt="Three headings: Summary and Recommendations in upright bold, with Observations rendered in italic bold between them."}

::: {.callout-note}
## Heading levels are shifted by one

Quarto's Typst format defaults to `shift-heading-level-by: -1`.
This means the show rule above that targets a Typst level-2 heading,
will apply to headings you've written in your markdown as level-3 headings, e.g. `### Observations`
:::

Quarto exposes your brand colors to Typst via the `brand-color` dictionary. 
If you've set a primary color, for example in `_brand.yml`:

```{.yaml filename="_brand.yml"}
color:
  primary: "#2e5090"
```

You can access that color in raw Typst blocks with `brand-color.primary`.

> For example, you could have only first level headings appear using your primary color, by using a show rule on headings that targets only `level: 1` with a set rule on `text()` setting `fill` to `brand-color.primary`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, you could have only first-level headings appear using your primary color by using a show rule on headings that targets only `level: 1` with a set rule on `text()` setting `fill` to `brand-color.primary`:
```

````{.markdown filename="report.qmd" .code-overflow-wrap}
{{< include _examples/typst/raw-typst/_heading-color.qmd >}}
````

![Level 1 headings rendered in the brand primary color, with a level 2 heading left in default black](images/typst-raw-typst-heading-color.png){#fig-typst-raw-typst-heading-color .border fig-alt="Summary and Recommendations headings in a dark blue brand color, with an Observations subheading between them in default black."}

You can also provide custom functions as show rules.

> These functions take the existing element as input and can return anything, but usually you'll return a transformed version of the input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These functions take an existing element as input and can return anything, but you'll usually return a transformed version of the input.
```

````{.markdown filename="report.qmd"}
{{< include _examples/typst/raw-typst/_heading-rule.qmd >}}
````

![Each heading followed by a thin gray horizontal rule](images/typst-raw-typst-heading-rule.png){#fig-typst-raw-typst-heading-rule .border fig-alt="Summary, Observations, and Recommendations headings, each followed by a thin gray horizontal rule spanning the page width."}

:::{.callout-tip}

## Including many set and show rules

If you've got a lot of set and show rules you are defining in raw blocks at the top of your content, you might want to move them into a separate file and include them with `include-before` in your document header:

```{.yaml filename="report.qmd"}
---
format:
  typst:
    include-before: styles.typ
---
```

Where `styles.typ` contains your Typst with set and show rules (and no raw Typst block syntax):

````{.typst filename="styles.typ"}
#set par(leading: 1.3em)
#show heading: set block(above: 2em)
#show heading.where(level: 1): set text(fill: brand-color.primary)
````

:::

### Custom templates {#sec-typst-templates}

> When set and show rules aren't enough, you can customize further by providing your own **template partials**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the set and show rules aren't enough, you can further customize by providing your own **template partials**.
```

Partials reach places a raw Typst block in your document body can't:

- You can apply set and show rules to content that appears before your body, i.e., the title block.

> - You can provide your own definition for how the title, authors, and date etc. should be laid out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You can provide your own definition for how the title, authors, date, etc. should be laid out.
```

![`template.typ` includes each partial in order. `typst-template.typ` defines the `article()` function and `typst-show.typ` calls it, passing everything below the show rule in as `doc`. The dashed slots mark where Pandoc injects Typst from your metadata.](images/typst-template-partials.svg){#fig-typst-partials .border fig-alt="A schematic of template.typ as an ordered stack of partial files: numbering.typ (number formats), definitions.typ (helpers), typst-template.typ, page.typ (#set page()), typst-show.typ, then the body, notes.typ (footnotes), and biblio.typ (bibliography). Three dashed injection slots sit between them: header-includes, include-before, and include-after. A callout marks typst-template.typ as defining article() and typst-show.typ as calling article(doc) with a #show rule. A dashed region groups include-before, the body, notes, biblio, and include-after as doc."}

::: callout-note

## Partials and templates change over time

We've documented the template and partials as of the time of writing, but they are subject to change as Quarto evolves.

> If you want to view the exact state of the template and partials, you can look at their source code for your version of Quarto in the [`quarto-cli` repo](https://github.com/quarto-dev/quarto-cli/) at <https://github.com/quarto-dev/quarto-cli/tree/v1.10.11/src/resources/formats/typst/pandoc/quarto> replacing `v1.10.11` with your version of Quarto.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to view the exact state of the template and partials, you can look at their source code for your version of Quarto in the [`quarto-cli` repo](https://github.com/quarto-dev/quarto-cli/) at <https://github.com/quarto-dev/quarto-cli/tree/v1.10.11/src/resources/formats/typst/pandoc/quarto>, replacing `v1.10.11` with your version of Quarto.
```

:::

> It's best practice to start by editing partials, and only if you can't get what you need override the complete template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's best practice to start by editing partials, and only if you can't get what you need, override the complete template.
```

  paper: "us-letter",
  margin: (x: 1.25in, y: 1.25in),
  numbering: none,
  columns: 1,
)
// ...
// your body down here somewhere
```

This call is coming from the template partial `page.typ`, which literally starts with:

```{.typst filename="page.typ"}
#set page(
  paper: $if(papersize)$"$papersize$"$else$"us-letter"$endif$,
$if(margin-geometry)$
  // Margins handled by marginalia.setup below
$elseif(margin)$
  margin: ($for(margin/pairs)$$margin.key$: $margin.value$,$endfor$),
$else$
  margin: (x: 1.25in, y: 1.25in),
$endif$
  numbering: $if(page-numbering)$"$page-numbering$"$else$none$endif$,
  columns: $if(columns)$$columns$$else$1$endif$,
)
// ... 
```

The `$` wrap Pandoc's template syntax, which is used for basic control flow, and to translate your document options into Typst syntax.
For example `$papersize$` is replaced with the value you set for `papersize` in your document header.
Essentially, this chunk is setting any `page()` parameters you've specified as document options, and setting default values if you haven't.

To add a header we need to call `page()` with a `header` argument anywhere after this chunk, but before the call to `article()` in `typst-show.typ`.

> It makes sense to do this in `page.typ`, since page setup is nominally its job, and doing so means we don't need to track updates to the more complicated `typst-show.typ`, and `typst-template.typ` partials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It makes sense to do this in `page.typ`, since page setup is nominally its job, and doing so means we don't need to track updates to the more complicated `typst-show.typ` and `typst-template.typ` partials.
```

To do so, you can copy the default `page.typ` into your project, then append this additional `#set page()` call to the bottom of the file:

```{.typst filename="page.typ"}
// the default page.typ content
// ...
{{< include _examples/typst/custom-template/_page-additions.typ >}}
```

Notice this addition directly references `$title$`.

> This pulls in the `title` you've set in the document header and means changes to `title` will automatically propagate to our page header.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This pulls in the `title` you've set in the document header, so changes to `title` will automatically propagate to our page header.
```

---
title: Route Punctuality Report
{{< include _examples/typst/custom-template/_quarto-template.yml >}}
---
```

Now, when rendered the document has a header on every page, as shown in @fig-typst-custom-template.

![First page rendered with the custom `page.typ` partial](images/typst-custom-template-report-template.png){#fig-typst-custom-template .border fig-alt="A rendered page with a small Route Punctuality Report header at top right, a thin horizontal rule across the full page width below it, then a large Route Punctuality Report title block, Dr. Sarah Okonkwo as author, and Summary and Recommendations sections."}

If you find yourself using the same partial across many projects, or want to share is more widely, you could bundle it into a Typst format extension. 
You can read more about building Typst format extensions in the [Quarto documentation on Typst customization](https://quarto.org/docs/output-formats/typst-custom-formats.html).

## Wrapping Up

In this chapter, you created your first PDF with `format: typst`, then worked through the types of content you'll most often use: navigation, links, citations, math, code blocks, and computational outputs.

> You saw how to make a PDF accessible by targeting the PDF/UA-1 standard, and how to customize its appearance through document options, and brand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You saw how to make a PDF accessible by targeting the PDF/UA-1 standard, and how to customize its appearance through document options and brand.
```

When you need further customization, you can use `set` and `show` rules in raw Typst blocks, and template partials.

There's plenty more you can do with `format: typst` that we didn't cover. Two more worth knowing about:

* **Typst books.** This chapter focused on single documents, but Typst output works in Quarto [books](https://quarto.org/docs/books/) too.

* **Prebuilt templates.** The community publishes Typst formats, such as journal article templates, that you can add to your project with `quarto use template`. 

> A good place to look for them are on [Quarto's format listing](https://quarto.org/docs/extensions/listing-formats.html) and the community run [Quarto extensions listing](https://m.canouil.dev/quarto-extensions/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A good place to look for them is on [Quarto's format listing](https://quarto.org/docs/extensions/listing-formats.html) and the community-run [Quarto extensions listing](https://m.canouil.dev/quarto-extensions/).
```
